I'm going to read the scripture.
Uh, the Old Testament text comes from Isaiah chapter 58 versus one through 12.
Uh, the Psalms comes from Psalms one 10, one 12 versus one through 10.
And then according to your tradition, we'll stand for the reading of the gospel.
Uh, that's Matthew chapter 13.
I'm sorry, Matthew chapter five versus 13 through 20.
I'll be reading from the new revised standard version here.
Now the word of the Lord is this shout out, do not hold back.
Lift up your voice like a trumpet.
Announce to my people their rebellion to the house of Jacob their sins.
Yet day after day they seek me and delight to know my ways as if they were a nation that practiced righteousness and did not forsake the ordinances of their God.
They ask of me righteous judgments.
They want God on their side.
Why do we fast but you do not see?
Why humble ourselves, but you do not notice.
Look, you serve your own interest on your fast days and oppress all your workers.
This is Isaiah speaking.
He said, you fast only to quarrel and fight and to strike with a wicked fist.
Such fasting as you do today will not make your voices heard on high.
Is such the fast I choose a day to humble oneself?
Is it to bow down the head like a bullrush and to lie in sackcloth and ashes?
Will you call this a fast, a day acceptable to the Lord?
Is this not the fast that I choose?
To loose the bonds of injustice.
To undo the straps of the yoke.
To let the oppressed go free.
and to break every yoke.
When I read this text, I said, Reverend Jasmine, can I please preach this one?
I said, this is speaking to our nation on today.
She said, yes, for sure.
Verse seven says, is it not to share your bread with the hungry and to bring the homeless poor into your house?
When you see the naked to cover them and not to hide yourself from your own kin.
Then your light shall break forth like the dawn and your healing shall spring up quickly or manifest.
Your vindicator shall go before you.
The glory of the Lord shall be your rear guard.
Verse nine says, then you shall call and the Lord will answer.
You shall cry for help.
And he will say, here I am.
If you remove the yoke from among you, the pointing of the finger, the speaking of evil.
If you offer your food to the hungry and satisfy the needs of the afflicted, then your light shall rise in the darkness and your gloom shall be like the noon day.
Verse 11 says, the Lord will guide you continually and satisfy your needs and parts places and make your bones grow strong and you shall be like a watered garden, like a spring of water whose waters never fail.
Your ancient ruins shall be rebuilt and you shall be the foundations of many generations.
You shall be called the repair of the breach, the restore of the streets to live in Psalms 112 versus one through 10 praise the Lord.
Happy are those who fear the Lord who greatly delight in the commandments.
Their descendants will be mighty in the land.
The generation shall be blessed.
The generations of their upright will be blessed.
Verse three says, wealth and riches are in their houses and their righteousness endures forever.
They rise in the darkness as a light for the upright.
They are gracious, merciful and righteous.
It is well with those who deal generously and lend who conduct their affairs with justice.
for the righteous will never be moved.
They will be remembered forever."
Verse seven says, they are not afraid of evil tidings.
Their hearts are firm, securing the Lord.
Their hearts are steady.
They will not be afraid in the end.
They will look in triumph on their foes.
They have distributed freely.
They have given to the poor.
Their righteousness endures forever.
Their horn is exalted in honor.
Verse 10 says, the wicked see it and the angry they gnash their teeth and melt away.
the desire of the wicked comes to nothing.
And now let's stand for the reading of the gospel, Matthew chapter five, verses 13 through 20.
Let's read it together.
You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt has lost its tasty, its taste, how can it, the saltiness be restored?
It is no longer good for anything, but it's thrown out and trampled underfoot.
Verse 14, you are the light of the world.
A city built on a hill cannot be hid.
People do not light a lamp and put it under a bushel basket.
Rather they put it on a lamp stand and give light to all in the house.
In the same way, let your light shine before others so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father in heaven.
Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the prophets.
I have
come not to abolish but to fulfill.
For I truly tell you until heaven and earth pass away, not one letter, one stroke of a letter will pass from the law until all has been accomplished."
Verse 19, therefore whoever breaks one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of God, kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and the Pharisees, you will not enter the kingdom of heaven.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
You may be seated.
Today is Sunday, February the 8th, 2026.
Friends, we are just six Sundays into a new year.
Phew!
Doesn't it feel like more time has passed since just six Sundays into this new year?
We've already experienced what Atlanta calls an ice storm, and it's good to see you, brother Rory.
Rory is a colleague of mine, so it is good to see you, sir.
We've already experienced an ice storm.
We've already experienced horrific ice
agents in Minnesota, killings by horrific ice agents in Minnesota.
We've already experienced in just six weeks of this new year harassment and harm inflicted upon our black, brown, and white brothers and sisters.
And here we are today, God's faithful remnant.
We are in person and we are online.
And we are here today in first Atlanta, a church full of vision and possibilities.
led by a visionary leader, the Reverend Jasmine Rose Smothers.
And she's finishing up a powerful preaching series.
I'm so excited to be able to preach today on the theme, Manifest Healing.
Somebody say healing.
Manifesting is a spiritual and a cultural phenomenon that teaches that our thoughts can create our reality.
An urban dictionary explains to manifest is to make something happen, to make something real or to wish for something and it actually ends up happening.
In the Bible Proverbs 1821 says that death and life are in the power of the tongue and those who love it will eat its fruits.
Our manifest series explores how God reveals God's self in Jesus Christ and how we as a beloved community reveal Christ's light
justice, healing, and glory to all of the world.
From revelation to manifestation, join this journey.
Somebody say manifest.
I went back and listened to all of the sermons and I said, oh, I'm ready for the day.
Amen.
We have manifested light.
We have manifested belovedness.
And I heard the story.
We have manifested calling that call that just won't let you go.
And we have manifested justice.
And today we are manifesting healing.
Somebody say healing.
I'm one of those talk back preachers.
It goes fast if you talk back to me, friends.
Healing is a divine revelation, restoration, authority, freedom.
Healing is an act of divine revelation and liberation.
So again, we are manifesting light, belovedness, calling, justice, healing, mission, and glory all in 2026.
Amen.
Our scripture that's been read in your hearing comes from the Old Testament book of Isaiah, the prophet.
And I'd just like to share some background on that text that I've read for you coming from Isaiah 58 verses one through 12.
And this is one of those scripture texts.
Well, to me, if you walk it through slowly, the scripture speaks to sermon itself.
So I didn't want to just kind of crowd it out with a lot of words, but I wanted you to be able to listen and hear
just what the scripture says and how relevant it is for our world that we are navigating today.
But in this scripture as a background, the scripture text addresses a post-exilic community returning from Babylonian captivity.
So the people have been in captive in Babylon and now they have returned back to their hometown, back to their home community, back to their home sanctuaries and what is left of there.
They have experienced displacement,
destruction, and the loss of their homeland.
Although physically free from exile, they now face social decay and the breakdown of shared moral principles.
Authorities, prophets, and the broader community are still implicated in systemic injustice.
In chapter 58, the prophet Isaiah speaking to the religious people is making a distinction between true worship and false worship.
The prophet Isaiah is speaking on behalf of God and calls the rebellion and the prophet names the sins that is happening in the house of Jacob or in the house of God day after day.
He says, they seek me and delight to know my ways as if they were a nation that practice righteousness and did not forsake the ordinances of God.
They ask of me righteous judgments.
They did like to draw near to God and people cry out, why do we fast and you do not see?
Why do we humble ourselves and you do not notice?
The prophet Isaiah calls out what he sees as the religious leaders of the day doing that.
So I think it's important to note at this point, Reverend Jasmine, that we have to acknowledge in 2026, we are seeing religious leaders on a spectrum.
And we are not all the same.
We are not all the same.
I would describe this spectrum of religious leaders that we are seeing today in one extreme.
We are seeing this extreme Christian nationalism who believe in God, guns and America as a white Christian nation that needs to be reformed.
Many of those religious leaders.
Now I'm a seminary.
So this is what we got today, okay?
This is the message.
It's good news.
Somebody say good news.
It's good news, but I really just have to explain this as is.
So we are not all the same.
And I just need to say that because some people struggle and you don't have to leave Christianity.
You don't have to leave Christ because you don't agree with what we're seeing Christian people do.
We just have to acknowledge that Christianity exists on a spectrum and we are not all the same.
So when I hear Isaiah talking to the religious leaders of the day, I say, that's them, not me.
Amen.
Now, some of it is me.
Okay.
Now my own was mine, but I'm also going to let the scripture speak to the harm that's happening in the church today.
And I was so excited to me that this is good news because I feel like the Isaiah's call to the religious leaders is speaking to religious leaders that are doing harm.
If we're the one, listen, and sometimes in the text, when you can't say amen, just say, ouch.
Amen.
Ouch, sometimes it's us, but if it's not us, I'm so excited that I could hear the scriptures speak to the harm that's happening today.
But there are religious leaders that have named diversity, equity, and inclusion and empathy as harmful practices.
They've undergirded by fear and power.
They fueled by ideologies like replacement theory, which drives a crusade against persons who are black and brown, who have immigrated to America from other countries.
The group, there's an actual group called Christians Against Christian Nationalism.
And so Christians Against Christian Nationalism says this, and I was looking for a definition of Christian nationalism that was, you know, kind of easy to explain in a 20 minute sermon.
Amen.
And I'm 15 minutes in already.
So I got to keep going.
The group Christians Against Christian Nationalism says that Christian nationalism is not the same as Christianity.
And it can be defined and understood in a variety of ways.
In this campaign, we define Christian nationalism as a political ideology that seeks to merge Christian and America's constitutional democracy.
Some people may conflate Christian nationalism and Christianity because they both use the same symbols and language of Christianity, such as a Bible, a cross, and worship songs.
But Christian nationalism uses the veneer of Christianity to advance its own aims.
to point to a particular political figure, a party, or an ideology instead of Jesus.
We may call ourselves Christians, but we are not all the same.
So when you hear Isaiah speaking to religious leaders in this text, understand he's talking to religious leaders and religious leadership that is selfish and that is supporting a corrupt system.
He said it's important to, and it's also important to see this text that salvation is not only personal, but there are salvation for the collective.
Jesus did not just come to save.
us for no more.
Amen.
Jesus came to save and heal the collective.
So we also have to look and desire the salvation and the change that comes through systems changing as well.
So I also acknowledge the lens in which I view this text.
I view this text through a liberation lens so I can hear the prophet speaking to individuals and I can hear the prophet speaking to systems that individuals support.
that do harm to others.
The church is called to speak to both.
The church today is called to speak to individuals and the church is called to speak to harmful systems that create harm for individual people.
So in this text, we hear Isaiah calls out the fast of the selfish and corrupt religious system.
He says, look, you serve your own interests on your fast day.
and you oppress all the workers.
Look, you fast only to quarrel and to fight and to strike with a wicked fist.
Such fasting as you do today will not make your voice heard on high.
I say, well, thank you, Jesus.
Is such the fast that I choose a day to humble oneself?
Is it to bow down your head like a bull rush and to lie in sackcloth and ashes?
Will you call this a fast and acceptable day of the Lord?"
And then Isaiah goes on and courageously distinguishes what he describes as a chosen fast.
Somebody say chosen fast.
And Reverend Jasmine, I thought this was appropriate as Lent comes up because I'm going to, I believe that there's a chosen fast that we can decide that we can engage in Lent 2026.
Fasting is not just for our individual wellbeing.
A corporate fast from this text can change
and change corporate systems.
Isaiah 58-6 through 12 says this, and I wonder what would happen if Lent 2026, if churches would choose to fast with the focus of Isaiah 58-6 through 12.
I wonder what would happen if we choose this fast as our focus, not giving up chocolates or sweets, not fasting for personal piety or personal holiness.
What would happen if the church chose the fast that would dismantle systems of oppression?
I believe that Lent 2026
can be a fast that would choose to focus on dismantling systems of oppression.
What if we choose a fast with a focus to melt and abolish ice?
What if we choose a fast to focus that will end a corrupt government?
What if we choose a fast to focus that will end harmful immigration practices and not expand immigration detention centers?
What if we choose to focus on a fast that we can see an end to racist means being shared by the president
or team and when asked to apologize, he said no.
What if we fast with a focus on free and fair elections in 2026?
Isaiah asked this question, friends, so I'm only asking the church.
The question that Isaiah asked, is this not the fast that I chose?
He says there is a fast that we can choose that will lose the bonds of injustice.
It will undo the throws of the yoke.
Friends, there are people that have yolks around their necks.
Literally today we're watching it on television.
We're watching people be harmed.
Isaiah says this fast that he is choosing for us is a fast that will let the oppressed go free.
to break every yoke and is it not to do what this church is already doing?
Sharing your bread with the hungry friends.
This is the fast that God is choosing to bring homeless into your house.
It blessed me to hear you say that to bring when you see the naked to cover them, this church is already doing that.
So you're already aligned with the fast that God's choosing what it, but it says to not hide yourself from your own kin friends.
This is not the time to hide.
And then it says manifesting healing.
Isaiah says, if this is the focus of our fast, he says, then the light shall break forth like the dawn.
We want to see the light.
We want to see the glory of God.
He says, choose the fast that I'm calling you to fast in.
He says, your healing shall spring up quickly, not slowly.
Our healing can come quickly.
Your vindicator shall go before you.
The glory of the Lord shall be your rear guard and you shall call and the Lord will answer.
You shall cry for helping.
He will say, here I am.
If somebody say, if,
you remove the yoke from among you.
The pointing of the finger, the speaking of evil.
If you offer food to the hungry and satisfy the needs of the afflicted, he says, then the light will rise in the darkness and the gloom will be like the noon day.
The Lord will guide you continually and satisfy our needs in parts places.
This is the, this is the text preaching the day search.
He says you'll make your bones strong and you'll be like a watered garden.
like a spring of water whose waters never fail.
Your ancient ruins shall be rebuilt and you shall raise up the foundations of many generations.
You church shall be called the repair of the breach.
There's a breach that has happened.
There's a fast that we can choose that can help heal the breach.
He said, you'll be the restorer of the streets to dwell in.
God sees the injustices that God's people are experiencing.
And God is asking the question, who will intervene on behalf of God's people?
As I read and reflected upon this text, I asked myself, what will I do with this text?
I thought it described the American context, not only one of the past, but it describes a present moment.
And I pray that by our actions as the people of God, we can work together to create a different future.
So you go over to the New Testament and you hear the good news.
Why can we do something different?
The text answers the question.
We are the salt of the earth.
That is who we are.
In the words of Otis Moss, salt melts ice every day.
Come on somebody, salt melts ice every day.
That's Otis Moss.
I give him credit for that.
He says, you are the salt of the earth.
But if the salt has lost its taste, how can the saltiness be restored?
It is no longer good for anything, but it is thrown out and trampled on the foot.
You, church, are the light of the world.
A city that's built on a hill cannot be hid.
People do not light a lamp and put it under a bushel.
Rather, they put it on a lamp stand and it gives light to all that's in the house.
In the same way, let your light shine before others so that they may see your good works and give glory to your father in heaven.
Today I'm glad to be a Christian who is a part of the United Methodist Church.
The United Methodist Church has not been silent during this 21st century human rights crisis.
The United Methodist Conference I just saw yesterday in North Carolina took out a full page ad in a local newspaper and they said this, courage
love and change was the title of the newspaper ad.
We stand with our neighbors.
We are united Methodist Christians who see and grieve the aggressive, undisciplined, illegal, and inhumane treatment of people in our country in ICE raids.
We are horrified and heartbroken that our country has become a battleground ridden with fear and rage.
We believe in the God-given dignity of all people, including immigrants.
We refuse to remain silent and complicit.
We stand with our neighbors as we pray for and demand an end to the use of brute and deadly force with no accountability.
It is time for courage, love, and change.
The violence must stop.
Our faith compels us to show up and seek justice, defend the oppressed, welcome the stranger, and share the relentless love of God who calls us to a more perfect union
of love, peace and goodness, healing Lord, manifest healing, manifest healing.
I closed this sermon with Bishop Woody White's prayer that he prayed almost 30 years ago to close out the 1996 general conference.
He says, and now may the Lord torment us.
May the Lord keep us, keep before us the faces of the hungry, the lonely, the rejected and despised.
May the Lord afflict us with the pain for the hurt, the wounded, the oppressed, the abused, the victims of violence.
May God grace us with agony, a burning thirst for justice and righteousness.
And may the Lord give us courage and strength and compassion to make ours a better world, to make our community a better community, and make our church a better church.
And may we do our best to make it so.
And after we have done our best, may the Lord grant us peace.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.